---
layout: default
title: about
---

# About Lucid Operations

My name is Daniel Lee and Lucid Operations LLC (@LucidOperations) is the
consulting entity under which I provide consulting services to my clients.  In
one capacity or another I've been working with computers, software, and systems
for the better part of two decades now. I've had the good fortune to work with
some of the most successful companies of our time and a truly amazing set of
engineers and architects and have learned a great deal from that experience. I
hope to continue to provide clients with insight concerning their challenges
and provide actionable understanding and direction to guidance.

## Lucid Operations Statement of Purpose

Lucid Operations provides professional consulting services for companies
requiring their solutions and systems to be highly reliable, scalable, and
available.

Lucid Operations has extensive experiences in:

 - building high throughput transactional and financial processing systems
 - designing highly scalable and available architecture
 - delivering systems for computationally intense calculation and processing
 - implementing low latency monitoring and alerting systems
 - providing the best in class version control and release systems and processes

My interest is not in selling products or licenses but in helping your company
understands your challenges, options, and best solutions.  Providing neutral
unbiased solutions is our goal.

## Education

 - **B.S.** Mathematics and Computer Science, [Carnegie Mellon University](https://www.cmu.edu)
 - **M.S.** Engineering-Economic Systems and Operations Research
  (now [Management Science & Engineering](https://msande.stanford.edu)),
  [Stanford University](https://stanford.edu)

## Experience

15+ years professional experience as lead engineer/architect at
 
 - the largest on-line payments processor, PayPal Inc.;
 - the largest payments processor, Visa Inc.;
 - the largest social network, Facebook Inc.;
 - the largest professional network, LinkedIn Inc.;

creating solutions in systems design, coding, deployment, and operations with
an emphasis on payment processing, monitoring, and alerting.

## What I Provide

I will work with you to help understand your situation through the lens of my
experience.  I can help you come to a better understanding of your current
system.  Based on that understanding, we can move on to an analysis of future
opportunities; we can also prioritize potential incremental and architectural
improvements and estimate implementation effort.

My objective is to help you solve your current and future problems, preferably
before they affect your business, by bringing to bear my years of experience
and the experiences of my former employers.

You can see my LinkedIn profile [here][dleeli].
Email me at [dlee@lucid-operations.com][dleeloc] for more information
information.

[dleeli]: https://www.linkedin.com/in/dlee271
[dleeloc]: mailto:dlee@lucid-operations.com
